README.md, before:

# OpenGenomeBrowser

ALERT: This software is still under development! If you want to try it out, contact the developer.

_OpenGenomeBrowser is a dynamic and scalable web platform for comparative genomics._

-   OpenGenomeBrowser automates simple bioinformatics steps:
    - Dendrograms (Taxid-based, ANI-based and OrthoFinder-based)
    - Searching for annotations in genomes
    - Visualizing genomes on KEGG maps
    - BLAST
    - Visualisation of gene loci
-   OpenGenomeBrowser has few prerequisites:
    - Genome files must be stored in certain folder structure
    - One metadata file for each genome and strain
-   OpenGenomeBrowser is flexible:
    - Orthofinder is recommended, but not required
    - Computationally intensive processes can be outsourced to a cluster

### Key concepts

-   _Strain_: biological entity
-   _Member_: sequencing variant
-   _Representative_: best member of strain



## Prerequisites

### Folder structure

```
└── strains
     ├── STRAIN1
     ├── ...
     └── EXAMPLE1234
         ├── strain.json
         └── genomes
            ├── EXAMPLE1234-1-1.1
            └── EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1
              ├── genome.json
              ├── assembly.fna
              ├── protein.faa
              ├── genbank.gbk
              ├── generalfeatureformat.gff
              ├── annotations.ko
              └── annotations.eggnog
└── OrthoFinder
```

##### Notes:

-   genome names must start with the name of the corresponding strain
    -   we suggest to use this suffix format:
        `strain`-`isolate`-`assembly`-`annotation`
    -   example: strain=`EXAMPLE1234` -> `EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1`
-   gene locus tags must start with the genome identifier, then an underline (`_`)
    -   example: `EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000001`
    
### Metadata (NOTE: these specifications are not final!)

##### Notes:
-    paths are relative to the member folder, i.e. it's fine to have files in a subfolders of the member folder
-    date format: `"%Y-%m-%d"`, i.e. `2000-12-31`

##### strain.json:

(all mandatory fields have dummy data, all non-mandatory fields have the expected null-input)

```json
{
    "name": "EXAMPLE1234",
    "alternative_name": null,
    "taxid": null,
    "restricted": false,
    "tags": [],
    "representative": "EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1"
}
```

##### genome.json:

(all mandatory fields have dummy data, all non-mandatory fields have the expected null-input)

```json
{
    "identifier": "EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1",
    "contaminated": false,
    "old_identifier": null,
    "isolation_date": null,
    "env_broad_scale": [],
    "env_local_scale": [],
    "env_medium": [],
    "growth_condition": null,
    "geographical_coordinates": null,
    "geographical_name": null,
    "sequencing_tech": null,
    "sequencing_tech_version": null,
    "sequencing_date": null,
    "sequencing_coverage": null,
    "assembly_tool": null,
    "assembly_version": null,
    "assembly_date": null,
    "nr_replicons": null,
    "origin_included_sequences": [],
    "origin_excluded_sequences": [],
    "cds_tool": null,
    "cds_tool_date": null,
    "cds_tool_version": null,
    "cds_tool_faa_file": "protein.faa",
    "cds_tool_gbk_file": "genbank.gbk",
    "cds_tool_gff_file": "generalfeatureformat.gff",
    "cds_tool_sqn_file": null,
    "cds_tool_ffn_file": null,
    "assembly_fasta_file": "assembly.fna",
    "custom_annotations": [],
    "sixteen_s": {},
    "BUSCO": {},
    "bioproject_accession": null,
    "biosample_accession": null,
    "genome_accession": null,
    "literature_references": [],
    "tags": []
}
```

##### BUSCO format:
```
"BUSCO": {
    "C": 0,
    "D": 0,
    "F": 0,
    "M": 0,
    "S": 0,
    "T": 0
}
```

##### Custom annotations format - type eggnog:
```
"custom_annotations": [
        {
            "date": "0000-00-00",
            "file": "annotations.eggnog",
            "type": "eggnog"
        }
    ]
```
The file `annotations.eggnog` must be an eggNOG-mapper v2 output file. (Usual filename: `query_seqs.fa.emapper.annotations`)

##### Custom annotations format - type tsv:
```
"custom_annotations": [
        {
            "date": "0000-00-00",
            "file": "annotations.ko",
            "type": "KEGG"  # allowed types: "KEGG", "GO", "R", "EC", "custom"
        }
    ]
```
A valid custom_annotations file must be in this format: `locustag\tannotation1, annotation2, annotation3`
 
I.e., this would be a valid file:
```
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000001	K000001
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000004
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000008	K000001, K000002
```

##### 16S format:
```
"sixteen_s": {
    "ref db name": [
        {
            "description": "Fakebacillus bullshitingis strain 42 16S ribosomal RNA, partial sequence",
            "taxid": 0,
            "evalue": 0.0
        }
    ]
}
```



## Set-up (to be simplified)

### Basic steps

-   install dependencies
-   create Python 3.6+ venv
-   create Postgresql 10+ database
-   clone this repository, adapt settings
-   populate Postgresql database
-   configure nginx and uwsgi (for deployment only)

### Example commands (Note: these commands were used on CentOS 8

##### install dependencies

```
sudo dnf install python3-devel python3-numpy postgresql postgresql-devel postgresql-server libpq-devel python3-psycopg2 pcre-devel
# these packages may have other names in other operating systems!
```

##### create Python 3.6+ venv (in an appropriate location)

```
python3 -m venv ogb_venv
source ogb_venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install setuptools wheel
```

##### create Postgresql 10+ database

```
sudo postgresql-setup initdb
sudo systemctl enable postgresql
sudo systemctl start postgresql
sudo passwd postgres  # set password for postgres user
sudo su - postgres
[as user postgres]$ initdb -D open_genome_browser
[as user postgres]$ systemctl restart postgresql.service
[as user postgres]$ createuser --encrypted --pwprompt ogb_admin  # example: kQPJQ3mWvK4jXp
[as user postgres]$ createdb --owner=ogb_admin open_genome_browser_db
[as user postgres]$ exit
```

Test if you can connect to the database:

```
sudo systemctl restart postgresql.service
psql -d open_genome_browser_db -U ogb_admin
$ open_genome_browser_db=> \quit
```
If it does not work, try adjusting `/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`
(see [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18664074/getting-error-peer-authentication-failed-for-user-postgres-when-trying-to-ge)))

Note: if you mess up and want to start fresh, this is how to drop and recreate the database:

```
# NOTE: this deletes ALL data in open_genome_browser_db!
sudo su - postgres
[as user postgres]$ dropdb open_genome_browser_db
[as user postgres]$ createdb open_genome_browser_db --owner ogb_admin
[as user postgres]$ exit
# note: now re-run "python manage.py makemigrations && python manage.py migrate" to recreate the database schemes
```

##### clone this repository (into an appropriate location), adapt settings

```
git clone https://gitlab.bioinformatics.unibe.ch/troder/opengenomebrowser.git
cd opengenomebrowser
git submodule update --init --recursive
pip install -r requirements.txt  # ensure you are in the previously created venv!
```

Create and edit settings.py:
```
cp OpenGenomeBrowser/settings_template.py OpenGenomeBrowser/settings.py
vi OpenGenomeBrowser/settings.py
```
-   change DEBUG to True **only** for development!
-   change DEBUG to True **only** for development!
-   change GENOMIC_DATABASE to the path to your folder structure
-   change DATABASES[PASSWORD] to the passwort you just set for Postgresql
-   change ALLOWED_HOSTS to the URL/IP you are planning to serve OpenGenomeBrowser as (example: `['opengenomebrowser.yourdomain.com']`)
-   change SECRET_KEY to a randomly created string; such strings can be created like this:
```python
# in a python console of a venv with django installed
from django.core.management.utils import get_random_secret_key
get_random_secret_key()
```

##### populate Postgresql database
Create schemes and tables in the database
```
python manage.py makemigrations
python manage.py migrate
python manage.py collectstatic
# python manage.py createsuperuser: superusername:supersafepassword
```

Import data from folder structure into database:
```
# create blast-dbs for every fasta.fna and protein.faa (only if this has not been done yet)
python db_setup/make_blast_dbs.py --db_path=/path/to/folder_structure
# start import (run this command again to load changes that have been made to the folder_structure into OpenGenomeBrowser)
python db_setup/import_database.py
```


##### configure nginx and uwsgi (for deployment only)
If you are developing, you can run the website using `python manage.py runserver` and open [http://127.0.0.1:8000/](http://127.0.0.1:8000/)
I recommend PyCharm Pro (free for students) as IDE as it supports Django.

Even if you want to deploy, use `python manage.py runserver` to test if that works.

Follow this tutorial: [uwsgi-docs](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/Django_and_nginx.html)

Example uwsgi config:
```
[uwsgi]
chmod-socket = 664
chdir=/path/to/opengenomebrowser
home=/path/to/python/venv
module=OpenGenomeBrowser.wsgi
processes=10
threads=2
env=OpenGenomeBrowser.settings
master=True
pidfile=/tmp/opengenomebrowser-master.pid
vacuum=True
max-requests=5000
buffer-size=30000
# daemonize=/home/username/uwsgi.log
socket=/path/to/ogb.sock
```

run using `uwsgi uwsgi.ini`

Example uwsgi config:
```
upstream django {
    server unix:///path/to/ogb.sock;
}

server {
    listen       443 ssl http2 default_server;
    server_name  opengenomebrowser.yourdomain.com;
    ssl_certificate /path/to/fullchain.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /path/to/privkey.pem;
    ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:1m;
    ssl_session_timeout  10m;
    ssl_ciphers TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256:ECDHE+AESGCM;
    ssl_protocols       TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
    ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
    add_header X-Frame-Options 'SAMEORIGIN' always;

    add_header X-Content-Type-Options nosniff;
    add_header X-XSS-Protection "1; mode=block";
    add_header Content-Security-Policy "default-src 'self'; script-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline' 'unsafe-eval'; img-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline' w3.org data:; style-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline'; font-src 'self'; frame-src 'self'; object-src 'self'";

    charset     utf-8;
    # max upload size
    client_max_body_size 10M;   # adjust to taste

    # Django media
    location /media  {
        alias /path/to/opengenomebrowser/dist/media;  # your Django project's media files - amend as required
    }

    location /static {
        alias /path/to/opengenomebrowser/static_root; # your Django project's static files - amend as required
    }

    # Finally, send all non-media requests to the Django server.
    location / {
        uwsgi_pass  django;
        include     /etc/nginx/uwsgi_params;
    }
}
```

Commit message:

improved README.md, added Contact section to Index

README.md, after:

# OpenGenomeBrowser

ALERT: This software is still under development! If you want to try it out, contact the developer.

_OpenGenomeBrowser is a dynamic and scalable web platform for comparative genomics._

-   OpenGenomeBrowser automates simple bioinformatics steps:
    - Dendrograms (Taxid-based, ANI-based and OrthoFinder-based)
    - Searching for annotations in genomes
    - Visualizing genomes on KEGG maps
    - BLAST
    - Visualisation of gene loci
-   OpenGenomeBrowser has few prerequisites:
    - Genome files must be stored in certain folder structure
    - One metadata file for each genome and strain
-   OpenGenomeBrowser is flexible:
    - Orthofinder is recommended, but not required
    - Computationally intensive processes can be outsourced to a cluster

### Key concepts

-   _Strain_: biological entity
-   _Member_: sequencing variant
-   _Representative_: best member of strain



## Get help
If you find a bug that has not already been reported, submit an issue on this github.

If you want to chat, contact me via [discord](https://discord.gg/mDm4fqf).



## Prerequisites

### Folder structure

```
└── strains
     ├── STRAIN1
     ├── ...
     └── EXAMPLE1234
         ├── strain.json
         └── genomes
            ├── EXAMPLE1234-1-1.1
            └── EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1
              ├── genome.json
              ├── assembly.fna
              ├── protein.faa
              ├── genbank.gbk
              ├── generalfeatureformat.gff
              ├── annotations.ko
              └── annotations.eggnog
└── OrthoFinder
```

##### Notes:

-   genome names must start with the name of the corresponding strain
    -   we suggest to use this suffix format:
        `strain`-`isolate`-`assembly`-`annotation`
    -   example: strain=`EXAMPLE1234` -> `EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1`
-   gene locus tags must start with the genome identifier, then an underline (`_`)
    -   example: `EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000001`
    
### Metadata (NOTE: these specifications are not final!)

##### Notes:
-    paths are relative to the member folder, i.e. it's fine to have files in a subfolders of the member folder
-    date format: `"%Y-%m-%d"`, i.e. `2000-12-31`

##### strain.json:

(all mandatory fields have dummy data, all non-mandatory fields have the expected null-input)

```json
{
    "name": "EXAMPLE1234",
    "alternative_name": null,
    "taxid": null,
    "restricted": false,
    "tags": [],
    "representative": "EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1"
}
```

##### genome.json:

(all mandatory fields have dummy data, all non-mandatory fields have the expected null-input)

```json
{
    "identifier": "EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1",
    "contaminated": false,
    "old_identifier": null,
    "isolation_date": null,
    "env_broad_scale": [],
    "env_local_scale": [],
    "env_medium": [],
    "growth_condition": null,
    "geographical_coordinates": null,
    "geographical_name": null,
    "sequencing_tech": null,
    "sequencing_tech_version": null,
    "sequencing_date": null,
    "sequencing_coverage": null,
    "assembly_tool": null,
    "assembly_version": null,
    "assembly_date": null,
    "nr_replicons": null,
    "origin_included_sequences": [],
    "origin_excluded_sequences": [],
    "cds_tool": null,
    "cds_tool_date": null,
    "cds_tool_version": null,
    "cds_tool_faa_file": "protein.faa",
    "cds_tool_gbk_file": "genbank.gbk",
    "cds_tool_gff_file": "generalfeatureformat.gff",
    "cds_tool_sqn_file": null,
    "cds_tool_ffn_file": null,
    "assembly_fasta_file": "assembly.fna",
    "custom_annotations": [],
    "sixteen_s": {},
    "BUSCO": {},
    "bioproject_accession": null,
    "biosample_accession": null,
    "genome_accession": null,
    "literature_references": [],
    "tags": []
}
```

##### BUSCO format:
```
"BUSCO": {
    "C": 0,
    "D": 0,
    "F": 0,
    "M": 0,
    "S": 0,
    "T": 0
}
```

##### Custom annotations format - type eggnog:
```
"custom_annotations": [
        {
            "date": "0000-00-00",
            "file": "annotations.eggnog",
            "type": "eggnog"
        }
    ]
```
The file `annotations.eggnog` must be an eggNOG-mapper v2 output file. (Usual filename: `query_seqs.fa.emapper.annotations`)

##### Custom annotations format - type tsv:
```
"custom_annotations": [
        {
            "date": "0000-00-00",
            "file": "annotations.ko",
            "type": "KEGG"  # allowed types: "KEGG", "GO", "R", "EC", "custom"
        }
    ]
```
A valid custom_annotations file must be in this format: `locustag\tannotation1, annotation2, annotation3`
 
I.e., this would be a valid file:
```
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000001	K000001
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000004
EXAMPLE1234-2-1.1_000008	K000001, K000002
```

##### 16S format:
```
"sixteen_s": {
    "ref db name": [
        {
            "description": "Fakebacillus bullshitingis strain 42 16S ribosomal RNA, partial sequence",
            "taxid": 0,
            "evalue": 0.0
        }
    ]
}
```



## Set-up (to be simplified)

### Basic steps

1.   install dependencies
1.   create Python 3.6+ venv
1.   create Postgresql 10+ database
1.   clone this repository, adapt settings
1.   populate Postgresql database
1.   configure nginx and uwsgi (for deployment only)

### Example commands (Note: these commands were used on CentOS 8

##### 1. install dependencies

```
sudo dnf install python3-devel python3-numpy postgresql postgresql-devel postgresql-server libpq-devel python3-psycopg2 pcre-devel
# these packages may have other names in other operating systems!
```

##### 2. create Python 3.6+ venv (in an appropriate location)

```
python3 -m venv ogb_venv
source ogb_venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install setuptools wheel
```

##### 3. create Postgresql 10+ database

```
sudo postgresql-setup initdb
sudo systemctl enable postgresql
sudo systemctl start postgresql
sudo passwd postgres  # set password for postgres user
sudo su - postgres
[as user postgres]$ initdb -D open_genome_browser
[as user postgres]$ systemctl restart postgresql.service
[as user postgres]$ createuser --encrypted --pwprompt ogb_admin  # example: kQPJQ3mWvK4jXp
[as user postgres]$ createdb --owner=ogb_admin open_genome_browser_db
[as user postgres]$ exit
```

Test if you can connect to the database:

```
sudo systemctl restart postgresql.service
psql -d open_genome_browser_db -U ogb_admin
$ open_genome_browser_db=> \quit
```
If it does not work, try adjusting `/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`
(see [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18664074/getting-error-peer-authentication-failed-for-user-postgres-when-trying-to-ge)))

Note: if you mess up and want to start fresh, this is how to drop and recreate the database:

```
# NOTE: this deletes ALL data in open_genome_browser_db!
sudo su - postgres
[as user postgres]$ dropdb open_genome_browser_db
[as user postgres]$ createdb open_genome_browser_db --owner ogb_admin
[as user postgres]$ exit
# note: now re-run "python manage.py makemigrations && python manage.py migrate" to recreate the database schemes
```

##### 4. clone this repository (into an appropriate location), adapt settings

```
git clone https://gitlab.bioinformatics.unibe.ch/troder/opengenomebrowser.git
cd opengenomebrowser
git submodule update --init --recursive
pip install -r requirements.txt  # ensure you are in the previously created venv!
```

Create and edit settings.py:
```
cp OpenGenomeBrowser/settings_template.py OpenGenomeBrowser/settings.py
vi OpenGenomeBrowser/settings.py
```
-   change `DEBUG` to `True` **only** for development!
-   change `DEBUG` to `True` **only** for development!
-   change `GENOMIC_DATABASE` to the path to your folder structure
-   change `DATABASES[PASSWORD]` to the passwort you just set for Postgresql
-   change `ALLOWED_HOSTS` to the URL/IP you are planning to serve OpenGenomeBrowser as (example: `['opengenomebrowser.yourdomain.com']`)
-   change `SECRET_KEY` to a randomly created string; such strings can be created like this:
```python
# in a python console of a venv with django installed
from django.core.management.utils import get_random_secret_key
get_random_secret_key()
```

##### 5. populate Postgresql database
Create schemes and tables in the database
```
python manage.py makemigrations
python manage.py migrate
python manage.py collectstatic
# python manage.py createsuperuser: superusername:supersafepassword
```

Import data from folder structure into database:
```
# create blast-dbs for every fasta.fna and protein.faa (only if this has not been done yet)
python db_setup/make_blast_dbs.py --db_path=/path/to/folder_structure
# start import (run this command again to load changes that have been made to the folder_structure into OpenGenomeBrowser)
python db_setup/import_database.py
```


##### 6. configure nginx and uwsgi (for deployment only)
If you are developing, you can run the website using `python manage.py runserver` and open [http://127.0.0.1:8000/](http://127.0.0.1:8000/)
I recommend PyCharm Pro (free for students) as IDE as it supports Django.

Even if you want to deploy, use `python manage.py runserver` to test if that works.

Follow this tutorial: [uwsgi-docs](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/Django_and_nginx.html)

Example uwsgi config:
```
[uwsgi]
chmod-socket = 664
chdir=/path/to/opengenomebrowser
home=/path/to/python/venv
module=OpenGenomeBrowser.wsgi
processes=10
threads=2
env=OpenGenomeBrowser.settings
master=True
pidfile=/tmp/opengenomebrowser-master.pid
vacuum=True
max-requests=5000
buffer-size=30000
# daemonize=/home/username/uwsgi.log
socket=/path/to/ogb.sock
```

run using `uwsgi uwsgi.ini`

Example uwsgi config:
```
upstream django {
    server unix:///path/to/ogb.sock;
}

server {
    listen       443 ssl http2 default_server;
    server_name  opengenomebrowser.yourdomain.com;
    ssl_certificate /path/to/fullchain.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /path/to/privkey.pem;
    ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:1m;
    ssl_session_timeout  10m;
    ssl_ciphers TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256:ECDHE+AESGCM;
    ssl_protocols       TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
    ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
    add_header X-Frame-Options 'SAMEORIGIN' always;

    add_header X-Content-Type-Options nosniff;
    add_header X-XSS-Protection "1; mode=block";
    add_header Content-Security-Policy "default-src 'self'; script-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline' 'unsafe-eval'; img-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline' w3.org data:; style-src 'self' 'unsafe-inline'; font-src 'self'; frame-src 'self'; object-src 'self'";

    charset     utf-8;
    # max upload size
    client_max_body_size 10M;   # adjust to taste

    # Django media
    location /media  {
        alias /path/to/opengenomebrowser/dist/media;  # your Django project's media files - amend as required
    }

    location /static {
        alias /path/to/opengenomebrowser/static_root; # your Django project's static files - amend as required
    }

    # Finally, send all non-media requests to the Django server.
    location / {
        uwsgi_pass  django;
        include     /etc/nginx/uwsgi_params;
    }
}
```
